The Ultimate Leopard Gecko Care Sheet
These are recommendations, based on researching and reading many online documents and forum postings. 

•	He/She should be no younger then 4 months if you want to begin handling it right away.

•	Will often not eat when brought to a new home or placed in a new tank/home due to stress.

•	Are docile and can be “tamed” if you teach them to trust you but they are not like a cat or dog.

•	When you first bring yours home do not handle it for 3 or 4 days (or until it has eaten and gone potty a few times). You may offer it food but it may refuse the food until it is comfortable in its new home. Holding it may increase the time it takes for it to begin eating. 

•	Require heat; however do not place their home in direct sunlight.

•	Require a moist hiding spot and a dry hiding spot.  + Only eat live insects.  +  Can live 10-20 years.  +  Measure about 10” long full from nose to tail tip.

•	Come in an amazing array of colors and the more exotic and rare the more expensive. A classic leopard design is sometimes called a “normal” and one of the least expensive morphs.

•	The colors and patterns on the babies change as they grow so keep this in mind when purchasing younger animals. 

How often can I hold my Leopard Gecko?
Recommended maximum handling 15 minutes a day. If younger then 1 year it is best to not handle every day. 

What size tank do I need?
A 10 or 20 gallon GLASS tank is recommended. Never house more then 1 Leopard Gecko in a 10-gallon tank. Never house male Leopard Gecko’s together. 

Is my Leopard Gecko going to be lonely?
They do not mind being alone and are perfectly happy to be by themselves.  No scientific research that I can find the prove this but many internet forum postings have proven that even females don’t always get along and will dominate or steal food and even fight.  Males fight.

What if I really-really want more then 1 Leopard Gecko?
Make sure the Gecko’s are the same age or size. 
Make sure they are both female.  
Make sure they each have their own shelter and place to hide by themselves. 
Make sure the tank is no smaller then 20 gallons.

Another options, give them each their own tank so that none of the above is a concern.

What does the tank need to have in it?
1) 1 or 2 dry hideouts 2) moist hide out 3) Water source 5) warm zone 6) cool zone 
They require 2 or 3 places to hide, one of which needs to be “moist”. The easiest way to create a moist hide is with a plastic disposable food container. Cut a hole in the side or top (cover sharp edges, make sure they can figure out how to climb in) and place a damp paper towel inside and put the top back on. 

What do I put on the floor of the tank?
“Substrate” is a word used to mean what you put on the floor of the glass container. 
PAPER TOWELS or NEWSPAPER is an easy to clean substrates.  Pet stores sell washable carpets as well. Tiles are another possibility but make sure you research which sort of tile material is best.

Can I put sand in the tank? 
People online argue about this a lot. Leopard Gecko’s can become “impacted” and die from ingesting too much sand. Some people say it’s the size of the sand that matters. Most people recommend to NOT put sand in, to avoid the risk. Do so at your own risk and know it could harm your animal. I can find no scientific studies regarding this. 

Do Leopard Gecko’s require heat?
They require belly heat to digest food; under tank heating pads can be purchased at pet stores. Raise the tank up on pads on each corner so the entire tank is off the surface (avoids overheating and fires). Attach the pad underneath on one side.  Plug the pad into a digital thermostat and set the heat to 90 degrees.

[ILLUSTRATION or VIDEO]

The digital thermostat will come with a little probe that you actually run down the inside of the tank and tape it down on the glass that is on top of the heat pad you have attached on the underside of the tank. This is inside the tank and measures how hot that heating pad is making the surface for the leopard gecko. The thermostat can be set to keep the temperature at 90 and turn the heating pad on and off as necessary. 

Fun Fact: Leopard Geckos are nocturnal they do not need sunlight or special light bulbs. You may however require some sort of bulb so that your tank is the right temperature: 75 degrees is a good air temperature during the day. A blue or red night time viewing bulb (50 watts is good enough for a small tank) will allow you to see at night, and provide a bit of heat during the day. Albino Leopard Geckos will not like daylight bulbs, as it will be too bright for them. Remember that the floor temperature in the hot zone where you place the pad should be 90 degrees. 

What do I feed my juvenile Leopard Gecko? (Under the age of 1 year)
They require LIVE food and eat insects only. They are attracted to food that moves and will usually ignore things that do not move. Feed them as much as they can eat in a 15 to 20 minute time span.

The short answer is a mix of SMALL crickets and SMALL mealworms.

Good to know: Some people recommend crickets only for juveniles. Some people have fed theirs only mealworms. I’ve not found any proof either way so you can A) go by the recommendation of the person you purchased the gecko from (always good to know what it was being fed) and B) use a mixture of both. Juveniles should be given SMALL sized crickets and mealworms. A good rule of thumb many people use is to make sure the insect is not larger then half the width of their head.  ADULTS can be given regular sizes.

What do I feed my adult Leopard Gecko? (Over the age of 1 year)

Geckos require LIVE food and eat insects only. The short answer is a mix of SMALL crickets and SMALL mealworms and a host of other things but these are the easiest two things to acquire from pet stores easily. Feed them as much as they can eat in a 15 to 20 minute time span.

•	Crickets – Recommended and easy to get at pet stores
•	Mealworms – Recommended and easy to get at pet stores
•	Silkworms – Expensive and don’t live very long
•	Dubia Roaches – Easy to breed if you are looking to save money
•	Waxworms – Do not feed these regularly, high in fat and addictive

Fun Fact: Do not feed your leopard gecko insects you found outside your home, they will contain a toxic load of pesticides and other things that would be harmful to your leopard gecko.

How do I gut load the food?
Gut loading their food is simply a way to make sure they are eating healthy food.
Crickets – Place an apple slice in the bag or place you keep the live crickets.
Mealworms  - Fruits and vegetables that do not contain a lot of water. Shredded Carrots is a recommended one.

I have found no scientific proof this is the best thing to feed them, but common sense would say vegetables and fruit are a good source of vitamins and minerals. 

Won’t the crickets chirp? 
Petsmart sells crickets that are juveniles and do not chirp. They sell them in a bag, make sure they place a bit of cardboard or egg carton so the crickets have a place to sit. You can place something moist so they have a source of water in the bag as well. 

Fun Fact: Some people buy special cricket boxes or containers. This is personal preference; you can keep them in the plastic bag they come in as long as there is some scrap cardboard (egg cartons are most desirable because of their shape) to keep the crickets alive and well. They breathe through their abdomens so a surface to stand on is best.

What do I do with the mealworms?
Place the container in your fridge. Let them come back to room temperature by taking them out about 15 minutes before feeding your gecko so they wiggle again. If not kept refrigerated they will turn into beetles. They can last in the fridge for up to a month.  They are very low maintenance. 

Does my Leopard Gecko need water?
Yes, breeders often suggest water bottle tops as a cheap and clean (disposable and easily replaceable) way to give them water. Make sure the container is not large enough for them to drown in, and clean it out regularly.

Fun Fact: I cannot find any studies on what sort of water to feed your Leopard Gecko, I have seen people post that they used tap water and have pets that are perfectly healthy and have been for a long period of time. Distilled water is an option. I can not find a definitive answer on this.

How do I feed my Gecko? 
Mealworms are often put in a special container they cannot crawl out of, glass for example. A small glass dish with ½ or 1” lip should be sufficient.  
Some people drop the crickets in, but this needs to be monitored. If crickets eat the Leopard Gecko poop it can be very bad for the leopard gecko to then eat those same crickets due to the bacteria in the poop that could build up to a toxic level in the leopard gecko. 

Fun Fact: Leopard Geckos are a bit like cats and will poop in the same place. Once you know where your pet is pooping, place some easily removed paper or cardboard in the spot so you can very quickly clean it.

Do I need to give my Leopard Gecko any supplements?
Calcium with D3 is needed. Many breeders place a calcium dish with the babies and most people feel juvenile Geckos should receive the calcium every day. Adults do not need it every day. 

Fun Fact: Many people place some in a bag with the crickets and shake it before giving the crickets to the gecko as a way to have them directly eat the calcium, this is called “dusting” the crickets. 

Do Leopard Geckos Shed?
Yes they do, and it is natural for them to EAT the shed. After this they may not eat for a few days but you may still offer them food to see if there is interest. A recommended brand of vitamin is Repashy Calcium Plus, you can dust the crickets with this, and then provide plan calcium in a water bottle cap in the tank.

Fun Fact: If your Gecko does not have a MOIST HIDE then the shed can get stuck and it is possible for a Gecko to loose its toes. 

Why do leopard geckos have a fat tail? 
They hold lots of backup food and water in their tails. This is one way they can go many days without eating. 

Fun Fact: Leopard Gecko’s can loose a tail if they are scared; they grow back (regenerate) but do not always look as pretty so avoid startling or scaring one if you don’t want it to loose its tail.  

My Leopard Gecko is sick what do I do? 
Find a local veterinary with experience in Leopard Geckos specifically. Do research online as many forums have postings about health issues.    

Further Reading

1. http://blogs.thatpetplace.com/thatreptileblog/2011/08/19/leopard-geckos-in-the-wild-the-natural-history-of-a-popular-pet/#.VELQC9xuS4I
2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leopard_gecko
3. http://nationalzoo.si.edu/Animals/ReptilesAmphibians/Facts/FactSheets/Leopardgecko.cfm
4. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/15/science/15obtail.html?_r=0
5. http://www.wired.com/2009/09/geckotail/
6. http://www.usfca.edu/fac-staff/dever/LeopardGecko.PDF - Has a nice list of cited work at the end of the document.
7. http://www.lihs.org/files/caresheets/E_macularius.htm








